So in the last lecture we added a new custom field here. And then we handled this field by hooking into the save_post
action and save_post action will run every time you save a post.
So when you save a post your custom field will be available in the super global $_POST.
So we received the value of the field that we added. And then we use update_post_meta() to add it in the post_meta
table using this key.
And so to retrieve this value in, let's say one of our templates, maybe in the content here we will use a get_post_meta().
And then we will give it the key that we defined here. And you've already done that when we needed
to retrieve the value to put it in the input.
But now we have some security issues.
We're not checking for user capabilities before updating the post meta. So we need to check first that
this user can edit posts or in fact edit this specific post. And we've already done something like that
in the last lecture. So let's add an if condition.
And here we will check if the current_user_can(), sorry current.
And we will need to use the same capability that we used in the last lecture which is "edit_post" and then pass
$post_id here.
And then if not we will return.
But what we've done now might not be 100% accurate.
So this will work if you are editing a post. But imagine this metabox was included in post and pages
and maybe other custom fields as well.
We mentioned the first lecture in the section that this could be an array. And this same metabox can be in
posts and pages.
So if you check for edit_ post" here if you are on a page this condition wont be suitable.
The condition in this case will be "edit_page".
So we need to get this capability name dynamically. And to do that we can create a new variable. Let's call it,
sorry, $edit_cap and we'll call a function called get_post_type_object(). So give this function
a "post_type" and it will return an object that contains all the information about this post type.
So we need to know the post that you are saving,
is it a post or a page or a custom post type
maybe? So to do that we have the post object here in the argument. So we can get the post type from it.
So post type of post.
So this will return a string and this will be post or page or etc.
And then this will return an object that contains information about this "post_type". And this object
will contain a key called "cap" or "capability". And this "cap" is an object and it contains all the capabilities
and their names. So we can access the "edit_post" capability
and if the "post_type" is a page the "edit_post" capability will be in "edit_page" and so on.
So this variable will now dynamically create the capability name.
So in case you're confused why don't we var_dump() this. Maybe inside the metabox.
Let's "echo ''" tags here.
In order to see this clearly.
So as you can see now this is the "post_type" object.
It's of type WP_post_type. And our post type
in this case is post and if you were editing a page this would be a page. And then we have the
capability key which is an object that contains all the capabilities so the "edit_post" capability for
the post is called "edit_post".
But the "edit_post" capability for another post type will be another thing.
So this way we are getting the capability name according to the "post_type".
So let's carry on. And now we will need to use this as the capability name.
So I hope this is clear.
Let's now do the nonce.
So when you are submitting this form we need to submit a nonce field in order to verify it
when we handle the data, right? So we know how to add this in a URL, in a GET requests, but in a form
it will be a little different.
So we will call a function called wp_nonce_field(). And this will take an "action".
So in our case we are saving the metabox. So let's call it "update_post_meta_box". And let's ignore
the other two arguments. And the name is the name of the field that you will retrieve in the $_POST super global.
So let's add this and you'll know what I mean in a moment. So let's call it "_themename_update_post_nonce".
So what this function will do is that it will create a hidden field with the generated nonce.
So let's inspect our form here.
And as you can see we have a hidden field which is called "_themename_update_post_nonce" and the value is a
nonce. So this information will now be sent in the post request. And we will have it here. So we can verify
the nonce
exactly like we did in the last lecture.
So if it's not set, this time it's $_POST  instead of $_GET, and the name which is this one.
Or if it's set and it's not a valid nonce field.
So "wp_verify_nonce".
And it will receive the "nonc"e field and the "action". we call the action
the first argument in the
wp_nonce_field() function.
So if it does not exist or it's not verified we will also return.
So this is how we secure saving of metaboxes.
Let's now create
one final thing for this lecture. Let's create a new field.
But this time let's create a dropdown field. And we'll use this field when we are building our single.php file
which will be used for the single blog.
So we need to add an option for the single blog. For every post we need the user to have the ability
to choose whether the layout should be a full screen layout or the post content with a sidebar.
So let's add a dropdown that will contain these two options. So let's add a LABEL. Let's
escape and translate and echo.
Let's call it "Layout" and our test domain.
And close the LABEL.
Let's give it a "for" here.
So this will be also the field name so let's call it "_themename_post_layout_field".
Let's copy this we'll use it now in the dropdown.
So let's create a SELECT
with the name of our field and the "id".
So let's give it a class "widefat".
And let's close it. And we will now have to create the OPTIONS for the SELECT.
So lets create an OPTION and this one will be the full screen
blog.
And let's copy one of these just to save some time. And we need to add a text for the OPTION.
So let's call it "Full Width". And let's duplicate this. And this one will be a post with a sidebar.
So let's call it  "sidebar" as a value and here.
And we need now to handle this field.
So let's copy this and modify it
So we have our field name is now this one. So let's paste it here and here. And let's call this key "post_layout".
And sanitize_text_field() can also work for the dropdown. You can create a custom function like with did in the
Customizer.
But you know you get the idea. So let's use sanitize_text_field() for now. And finally we'll have to retrieve the field.
And add it as the value for the dropdown.
So let's duplicate this and call it $layout.
And we have the meta key here. Make sure you don't mix it up with the field name.
So this $layout will now hold the value. And we now need to add selected attributes for the selected
value, right?
So you can do this using the if conditions and echo selected attribute
if the value is "full" here and stuff like that. But actually WordPress provides a nice function called selected().
So we can open PHP and call selected(). And this will take the "selected" value which will be the value that we got
from the database. And the "current" option value which will be "full".
And it will output the selected attribute
if the layout is equals to "full". So let's copy this.
And we'll have to edit in every option. And let's change the value.
And I think this should be fine.
So let's go back to the posts.
Now we have this option. Let's change it and save it.
And it's saved and everything is looking fine.
So as you can see every time you create a field you have to write the HTML for it. And then for each field
you should handle its submission.
And update_post_meta() and stuff like that.
So if you are having a lot of fields you'll end up with a lot of HTML here and a lot of if conditions
here. And this could be too much coding. We can do better than that.
So what I was thinking is maybe creating an array. Lets call $fields or whatever and this array will hold
other arrays. And each array here will represent a field. So it will for example have a "type" of "text"
and may be a "label"
and so on.
And then when we need to add another text field you just have to add another array in this field array.
And then instead of generating our HTML like so, we can just loop through this array and then check the
type of the field and generate this HTML automatically. And then we could also create some custom field
types like a color picker and write some JavaScript for it and stuff like that.
But then I thought that would be too much for this cause.
So maybe I could create a separate course for it. Just let me know if you'll be interested in something
like that.
What we'll be creating is basically like a mini advanced custom fields plugin.
But for now let's leave it like that.
And according to your feedback I might create this course. And let's now address another problem.
Now imagine we are defining these fields in our theme.
So we have the Post Subtitle. And let's assume the user decided to change your theme but he still needs
these fields. He still need the subtitle to use it in his new theme.
So defining this fields in your theme like we did now is not a best practice.
Instead we should define these fields in a plugin. So plugin in WordPress is the same as writing some
functions in functions.php.
Instead we write it in a separate folder in a plugin. So that it will not be dependent on the active
theme.
So we need to do that for our metaboxes in order for them to be available even if the user decided
to change your theme.
And before going to the next lecture I want to quickly show you what the custom fields look like if you activate
the Gutenberg plugin. Let's refresh.
As you can see it's still exists and it's working fine.
However now you cannot add this metabox in the side bar.
So this is not a big deal.
And this might actually change by the time Gutenberg is not released yet.
So let's now move our custom fields to a separate plugin.